# Single Cell Gene Expression Analysis Workflows

This folder contains the analysis workflows of a Flex Gene Expression demo dataset taken from 10x Genomics.

## Dataset overview

The **Kidney and Lung DTCs Matched PBMC MultiPro® Human Discovery Panel** dataset was generated by using Gene Expression Flex. 
Please follow [this link](https://www.10xgenomics.com/datasets/160k_DTC_Matched_PBMC_MultiPro_Human_Discovery_Panel) 
to the 10x Genomics Datasets website for more information and download the Cell Ranger **per-sample** outputs.

For this demo, you will need the <ins>filtered</ins> and <ins>raw</ins> feature/cell matrix HDF5 files from:
- PBMC Control 1
  -  `160k_DTC_Matched_PBMC_MultiPro_Human_Discovery_Panel_PBMC_Control1_count_sample_filtered_feature_bc_matrix.h5`
  -  `160k_DTC_Matched_PBMC_MultiPro_Human_Discovery_Panel_PBMC_Control1_count_sample_raw_feature_bc_matrix.h5`
- Lung Cancer PBMCs
  - `160k_DTC_Matched_PBMC_MultiPro_Human_Discovery_Panel_Lung_Cancer_PBMC_count_sample_filtered_feature_bc_matrix.h5`
  - `160k_DTC_Matched_PBMC_MultiPro_Human_Discovery_Panel_Lung_Cancer_PBMC_count_sample_raw_feature_bc_matrix.h5`
- Kidney Cancer PBMCs
  - `160k_DTC_Matched_PBMC_MultiPro_Human_Discovery_Panel_Kidney_Cancer_PBMC_count_sample_filtered_feature_bc_matrix.h5`
  - `160k_DTC_Matched_PBMC_MultiPro_Human_Discovery_Panel_Kidney_Cancer_PBMC_count_sample_raw_feature_bc_matrix.h5`

## File types

In each folder, the `no-output.ipynb` files are Jupyter Notebook files with all output text and images removed. 
This is to avoid the `ipynb` files from getting too big.

The `.md` files contains the identical workflow but in the Markdown syntax. 
This allow you to view the workflow including outputs on GitHub.

## Using the workflows

First, start the single-sample analysis with the HDF5 files from one of the three samples, for example Control 1 (see `160k_Human_Control1_PBMC`). 
At the end of the said analysis, the final `SingleCellExperiment` containing the filtered cells and any added metadata is stored as HDF5-based object.

Then, repeat the single-sample analysis with the remaining two PBMC samples.

Finally, use the integration workflow found in the `160k_Human_Integrated` folder 
to combine the cells from all three samples into a common space for consistent analyses 
and to perform differential expression comparisons.

## Set up

1. This workflow has been tested on R version 4.4 and Bioconductor version 3.20.
2. Required R packages (other dependencies not shown):

| Package | Source |
| --- | --- |
|	AnnotationHub	|	Bioconductor	|
|	batchelor	|	Bioconductor	|
|	BiocNeighbors	|	Bioconductor	|
|	BiocParallel	|	Bioconductor	|
|	BiocSingular	|	Bioconductor	|
|	bluster	|	Bioconductor	|
|	celldex	|	Bioconductor	|
|	cowplot	|	CRAN	|
|	DESeq2	|	Bioconductor	|
|	dplyr	|	CRAN	|
|	DropletUtils	|	Bioconductor	|
|	edgeR	|	Bioconductor	|
|	enrichR	|	CRAN	|
|	ensembldb	|	Bioconductor	|
|	ggforce	|	CRAN	|
|	ggplot2	|	CRAN	|
|	ggplotify	|	CRAN	|
|	glmGamPoi	|	Bioconductor	|
|	gtools	|	CRAN	|
|	HDF5Array	|	Bioconductor	|
|	igraph	|	CRAN	|
|	limma	|	Bioconductor	|
|	pals	|	CRAN	|
|	pheatmap	|	CRAN	|
|	plyr	|	CRAN	|
|	RColorBrewer	|	CRAN	|
|	scales	|	CRAN	|
|	scater	|	Bioconductor	|
|	scDblFinder	|	Bioconductor	|
|	scran	|	Bioconductor	|
|	scRUtils	|	GitHub	|
|	SingleR	|	Bioconductor	|
|	stringi	|	CRAN	|
|	stringr	|	CRAN	|
|	tidyverse	|	CRAN	|
|	viridis	|	CRAN	|

> [!WARNING]
> The **scRUtils** R package is current available only on [GitHub](https://github.com/ycl6/scRUtils), 
> see installation note [here](https://github.com/ycl6/scRUtils?tab=readme-ov-file#installation).

Optional: `kableExtra`

## References

The [Orchestrating Single-Cell Analysis with Bioconductor](https://bioconductor.org/books/3.20/OSCA/) 
provides an invaluable resource to the creation and development of the workflows presented here.
